

Please describe how your project proposal will benefit from being embedded within the Turing as a UK national research centre, how you will help grow the UK research community in this area and how you will contribute to the strategic development of the probabilistic programming research theme within the Turing and beyond. (200 words max)


The Turing's reputation and extensive national network will amplify our efforts to unify the fragmented landscape of PPLs in infectious disease modelling, fostering collaborations between the PPL community, epidemiological practitioners, and global entities like UKHSA, CDC, and WHO. This national perspective is key for our project's success, ensuring that the methodologies and tools we develop cater to a broad spectrum of international health challenges, capture current best practices, and are extensible by the community.


Our community-centric approach, building upon successes like EpiNow2 and epinowcast, aims to expand the existing epinowcast community, promoting the adoption of modern PPL methods within the UK infectious disease modelling community.


Furthermore, our proposal will significantly contribute to the strategic development of the probabilistic programming research theme within the Turing and beyond. Our emphasis on the compositionality of models, transitioning to Julia for enhanced inference, and our vision for tools that serve as flagship applications in probabilistic programming, aligns with Turing's aims. We anticipate that the successful delivery of this project will not only advance the field but also establish a stronger foothold for the Turing in applied public health, paving the way for larger, impactful projects in the future.



Composable Models for Real-time Infectious Disease Analysis in the Julia Ecosystem
Summary
Whilst Probabilistic Programming Languages (PPLs) have been used in infectious disease modelling for many years, their use greatly accelerated during the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite growing adoption the ecosystem of models has remained disconnected, in turn slowing advancement in methods, limiting wider utilisation by practitioners, and preventing robust evaluation. We propose to make use of the unique advantages of the Julia PPL ecosystem in active collaboration with the community at the Alan Turing Institute (ATI), to create a tool-kit of composable models for the real-time analysis of infectious disease outbreaks along with a community of users and developers.

Project objectives
Develop composable models of epidemiological dynamics for real-time infectious disease modelling.
Strengthen links between method development at the ATI and the applied public health community.
Promote composable probabilistic programming as a tool for dealing with epidemiological modelling problems.
Integrate the project in a real-time epidemiological modelling community that involves both practitioners and developers.

Description
The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed the value of infectious disease modelling to a wide audience. Epidemiologically informed models were used, for example, to interpret data for situational awareness and short-term forecasts1, to assess the impact of interventions2, and to predict longer-term dynamics3.

With increasing use of models in response to the pandemic came an expansion of the use of PPLs for infectious disease dynamics. Several R packages were developed using the stan PPL based on discrete renewal processes: the EpiNow2 R package4, which we developed and used to provide daily updates on key epidemiological quantities such as growth rates and reproduction number as well as short-term forecasts and which continues to be used by the World Health Organization (WHO), US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA); the epidemia R package5, an extension of the rstanarm package offering a comprehensive feature set for modelling infectious disease dynamics by integrating multiple data sources, such as cases, serology, and hospital admissions, into a unified modelling framework; the EpiMap model6, which incorporates population flows to model potential transmission across local areas; and, more recently, the epinowcast R package7, developed by our team as part of a wider community initiative aiming to address limitations in EpiNow2 by using a time-to-event approach in a joint model to handle a wider range of real-time modelling problems including nowcasting and missing data imputation.

However, all these tools share various challenges. One of the primary issues has been the inflexibility of models. For example, in EpiNow2 the interaction between R and stan led to models that were hard to adapt or extend, resulting in re-development of closely related models when there was a need to incorporate new data sources8. Another challenge has been the reimplementation of core processes due to the non-PPL implementation of foundational tools (such as renewal process in the popular EpiEstim R package) and difficulties sharing model modules across implementations in some PPLs, such as stan. This led to inefficiencies and redundancies in the different available tools, ultimately preventing advances being made within the field due to efforts spent on reimplementing core components. The sustainability and maintenance of tools have also been a concern due to the complexities of developing both a front-end and a PPL backend. Examples of this challenge are the epidemia and EpiMap packages, which have had no updates in the last two years despite their extensive feature set. Lastly, there's the challenge of model modularity, particularly in making lower-level model components available to advanced users. EpiNow2 attempted to address this issue by splitting models into separate components and chaining them together using a pipeline approach. However, this has been found to be liable to bias in some common contexts, where a joint modelling approach has been found to be more robust9. Currently none of the cited tools adequately address this issue, suggesting that alternative solutions outside of the stan ecosystem may be needed to advance PPL usage in infectious disease modelling.

The proposed project aims to address these issues by developing composable models for real-time infectious disease analysis in Julia, using the unique capabilities of the Julia PPL ecosystem. Composability presents an exciting opportunity for a robust solution to the challenges faced in the infectious disease modelling landscape10. The initial model will be based around the renewal process that underlies all the aforementioned tools. As the project develops, this will be complemented by modules that can reflect delays in the data streams, different observation models depending on the data source used, core groups, geography and other components that reflect the epidemiological question at hand, to be tested on data sets available either publicly or through our public health collaborators. This approach will not only facilitate efficient model exploration and validation but also allow for the seamless and statistically valid transfer of results between model components.

The project will draw upon the Julia expertise that exists within the ATI whilst benefiting from our experience in developing models in other PPLs and our ongoing collaborations with public health decision makers. Thanks to the modular set up the models we develop will be readily extensible by researchers whilst being easy to use for those with little experience in using PPLs. We aim to not only create a unified ecosystem by connecting the patchwork of current methodologies, but also to champion the advantages of composability in PPLs and in the Julia language in particular. By integrating with the ATI Julia community and capitalising on existing collaborations with entities like UKHSA, (E)CDC, and WHO, we aim to make models more adaptable, user-friendly, and sustainable, directly addressing the core challenges currently faced by tools in the field. We envision that a larger project building on successful delivery of this proposal could ultimately result in a set of flexible tools implementing state-of-the-art methodology that could be used to cater to a diverse range of epidemiological questions.

A core component of our project is model development. We aim to construct models that seamlessly integrate novel epidemiological data sources, such as viral load data11 and wastewater data12 alongside traditional surveillance metrics. This will be complemented by our efforts to link this project with the epinowcast community (www.epinowcast.org), fostering a symbiotic relationship between practitioners and developers. 

The transition from stan to Julia is another pivotal aspect of our proposal. On top of improving composability, this shift promises to simplify validation, ensuring that our models are both robust and reliable. Julia is uniquely suited to aid widespread adoption of PPLs within the infectious disease modelling community as it not only provides robust support for automatic differentiation, enabling different parts of the ecosystem to be used in a “plug and play” manner within a PPL based model, but also allows the model front-end and back-end to be written in a single performant language. This simplifies development but also democratises access as it lowers the barrier for those wanting to use or extend the methods.

Our proposal aligns with the strategic vision of Turing AI as well as the specific aims of this call. At its core, the project recognizes the instrumental role PPLs are increasingly playing in infectious disease modelling and thus supports further development of the probabilistic programming theme at the ATI. Yet, it also acknowledges that the true potential of PPLs, especially in terms of composability, remains an emerging area of known relevance to analysing infectious disease dynamics10. Developing composable models using the Julia PPL ecosystem directly speaks to this nascent domain.

Central to our proposal is the emphasis on the compositionality of models as a novel approach to investigating infectious disease dynamics and a focus of the call. Beyond composability, Julia's GPU support, and wide range of inference algorithms that support heavily parallel workloads, promises reduced computational overheads for our models, aligning with the call's focus on parallelization. This shift also simplifies various verification techniques, such as simulation-based calibration, and software development practices such as unit testing, ensuring our models are robust and reliable, echoing the call's emphasis on verification.

Our vision extends beyond tool development. We envisage tools that serve as a flagship application in probabilistic programming, ultimately capable of addressing a myriad of epidemiological questions. We have obtained confirmation that UKHSA are willing to collaborate with us on this proposal, thus helping ensure that outputs are fit for purpose and impactful.  Complementing this is our commitment to community engagement. Drawing from our successes with EpiNow2 and epinowcast, we aim to expand the epinowcast community by linking it with the ATI community and existing efforts like JuliaEpi, increasing adoption of modern PPL methods. This community-centric approach resonates deeply with the call's emphasis on fostering dissemination and adoption of PPL technologies. 

We are planning to firmly embed the project in the Turing community throughout the lifecycle of the project by supporting our secondments with physical presence, by hiring two new staff to be based at the Turing, and by running a series of workshops for the Turing community on challenges in epidemiological modelling that we think PPLs can address as well showcasing the tools as they are being developed.

The complexity of open-source development, maintenance, support, and community management, can be a challenge. Our past experiences developing and supporting rbi13, EpiNow2, and epinowcast over multiple years whilst managing communities of developers and users have given us a nuanced understanding of these challenges. Within these projects we have had to balance between scientific rigour, software development, and community engagement. These past projects, and our long-term commitment to them, serve as a testament to our ability to navigate such intricacies. Another potential challenge is the adoption barrier associated with transitioning to new platforms. Yet, our track record in transitioning EpiNow2 users to epinowcast, marked by our commitment to user support, comprehensive documentation, and training, assures that we are well-equipped to facilitate a smooth transition for users to the Julia PPL ecosystem. A further challenge is the long-term sustainability of the project. We aim to address this by integrating this project in the existing epinowcast community, which currently has 51 members across countries and institutions and promotes a community-driven development and ownership model.

In conclusion, our proposal offers a transformative and community-driven approach to infectious disease modelling. We envision successful delivery of the project will create stronger links of the ATI with applied public health and in doing so create the potential for a larger project that fully establishes the use of PPLs in epidemiology, leveraging the role of the ATI as a national centre of international relevance in this area. By harnessing the strengths of the Julia PPL ecosystem and integrating with the ATI community, we expect to drive significant advancement in the field of infectious disease modelling and, ultimately, increase preparedness for future outbreaks of global significance.

Expected outputs and impact
An integrated ecosystem of Julia packages for epidemiological estimation and forecasting with infectious disease data.
Research results investigating the validity of the proposed approaches based on epidemiological simulations.
A library of case studies where the proposed tools are applied and validated in an epidemiological context, and compared to existing approaches where available.
Research results analysing project outputs with respect to its objectives.
